README.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/WeAreNova"><img src="https://github.com/WeAreNova/mui-data-table/raw/main/docs/assets/favicon.png" height="90px"></a>
</p>
<h1 align="center">
  MUI Data Table
</h1>

<div align="center">

Comprehensive data-table component with powerful features out of the box for [MUI v4](https://v4.mui.com/) with support for [MUI v5](https://mui.com/) coming soon.

[![npm (scoped)](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@wearenova/mui-data-table?logo=npm&style=for-the-badge)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@wearenova/mui-data-table) [![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/dm/@wearenova/mui-data-table?logo=npm&style=for-the-badge)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@wearenova/mui-data-table) ![GitHub](https://img.shields.io/github/license/WeAreNova/mui-data-table?style=for-the-badge) [![GitHub deployments](https://img.shields.io/github/deployments/WeAreNova/mui-data-table/github-pages?label=Documentation&style=for-the-badge)](https://wearenova.github.io/mui-data-table/#/) [![GitHub Workflow Status](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/WeAreNova/mui-data-table/Build%20and%20Publish?logo=github&style=for-the-badge)](https://github.com/WeAreNova/mui-data-table)

</div>

#### Features

- Multi-Column Filtering
  - Able to filter by: strings, numbers, booleans and dates by default
- Single-Column Sorting
- Pagination
- Row Selection
- Column Grouping
- CSV Export
- Ability to "Pin" Columns

### Installation

MUI Data Table is available as an NPM package

```shell
// with npm
npm install --save @wearenova/mui-data-table

// with yarn
yarn add @wearenova/mui-data-table
```

> See full instructions in the documentation.

### Documentation

You can view the documentation in `docs/` or by going to the [documentation site](https://wearenova.github.io/mui-data-table/#/).

### Examples

You can view an example in `dev/`. More examples will come soon, feel free to open a PR if you want to add any examples under the `examples/` directory.

### Demo

You can view the full demo [here](https://codesandbox.io/s/mui-data-table-demo-b7vnp).

Or here is a GIF showing off some of the Data Table's features.

![Demo GIF](https://github.com/WeAreNova/mui-data-table/raw/main/docs/assets/demo-5x.gif)

Commit message:

docs(readme): update readme to include details on usage with `MUI v5`

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/WeAreNova"><img src="https://github.com/WeAreNova/mui-data-table/raw/main/docs/assets/favicon.png" height="90px"></a>
</p>
<h1 align="center">
  MUI Data Table
</h1>

<div align="center">

Comprehensive data-table component with powerful features out of the box for [MUI v4](https://v4.mui.com/).

[![npm (scoped)](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@wearenova/mui-data-table?logo=npm&style=for-the-badge)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@wearenova/mui-data-table) [![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/dm/@wearenova/mui-data-table?logo=npm&style=for-the-badge)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@wearenova/mui-data-table) ![GitHub](https://img.shields.io/github/license/WeAreNova/mui-data-table?style=for-the-badge) [![GitHub deployments](https://img.shields.io/github/deployments/WeAreNova/mui-data-table/github-pages?label=Documentation&style=for-the-badge)](https://wearenova.github.io/mui-data-table/#/) [![GitHub Workflow Status](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/WeAreNova/mui-data-table/Build%20and%20Publish?logo=github&style=for-the-badge)](https://github.com/WeAreNova/mui-data-table)

</div>

- For [Material-UI v4](https://v4.mui.com/) use v1.x
- For the current version of [MUI](https://mui.com/) use v2.x

> Both versions are actively maintained and shall continue to include upcoming features, bugfixes and improvements.

#### Features

- Cell Editing
- Multi-Column Filtering
  - Able to filter by: strings, numbers, booleans and dates by default
- Single-Column Sorting
- Pagination
- Row Selection
- Column Grouping
- CSV Export
- Pinnable/Freezable Columns

### Installation

MUI Data Table is available as an NPM package

```shell
// with npm
npm install --save @wearenova/mui-data-table@mui-v4
// or
npm install --save @wearenova/mui-data-table@^1

// with yarn
yarn add @wearenova/mui-data-table@mui-v4
// or
yarn add @wearenova/mui-data-table@^1
```

> See full instructions in the [documentation](https://wearenova.github.io/mui-data-table/#/v1/getting-started).

Or for [MUI v5](https://mui.com/)

```shell
// with npm
npm install --save @wearenova/mui-data-table

// with yarn
yarn add @wearenova/mui-data-table
```

> See full instructions for [MUI v5](https://mui.com/) in the [v2.x documentation](https://wearenova.github.io/mui-data-table/#/getting-started).

### Documentation

You can view the documentation in `docs/` or by going to the [documentation site](https://wearenova.github.io/mui-data-table/#/).

### Examples

You can view an example in `dev/`. More examples will come soon, feel free to open a PR if you want to add any examples under the `examples/` directory.

### Demo

You can view the full demo [here](https://codesandbox.io/s/mui-data-table-demo-b7vnp).

Or here is a GIF showing off some of the Data Table's features.

![Demo GIF](https://github.com/WeAreNova/mui-data-table/raw/main/docs/assets/demo-5x.gif)
