docs/columns.md, before:

# Column Definitions

The table's structure is defined by an array of columns which have the type `ColumnDefinition`.

This section shall go into more detail about what makes up the `ColumnDefinition` and the features you have access to.

## The Options

The Column Definition has many fields you can make use of.

#### Key - Required

The `key` field is the unique identifier for the column.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  key: string;
  ....
}
```

#### Title - Required

The **required** `title` field is used to specify the column header title and has two possible values:

- a `ReactNode` with some types excluded (see below)
- or a function which returns a `ReactNode` with some types excluded (see below)

?> If the value is a function, then it is passed all the table's data as an argument.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  title: Exclude<ReactNode, number | boolean | null | undefined> | (data: AllDataType) => Exclude<ReactNode, number | boolean | null | undefined>;
  ....
}
```

#### Path Render - Optional

The `dataIndex` field is used to specify the path to the data which is to be rendered using dot-notation.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  dataIndex?: string;
  ....
}
```

#### Custom Render - Optional

The `render` field is used for custom rendering of the content.

Its type is a function which is given:

- the current row's data
- whether the function is being called as part of exporting to CSV
- the unique row identifier
- the index of the row in the array of data

and returns a `ReactNode`.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  render?(data: RowType, isCSVExport: boolean, rowId: string, dataArrayIndex: number): ReactNode;
  ....
}
```

#### Numerical Render - Optional

The `numerical` field is a helper field for rendering and formatting numerical values.

The value can be one of:

- `true` which uses default number formatter options to render the value at the given `dataIndex`
- a path to the value to be rendered which also uses default formatting options
- an object with the type:

```ts
interface NumericalObject<RowType extends BaseData = BaseData> {
  path?: true | string; // `true` uses the value of `dataIndex`
  decimalPlaces?: number;
  minDecimalPlaces?: number;
  maxDecimalPlaces?: number;
  currency?: true | string; // `true` uses the default currency, which is "GBP" by default. Or you can override it here by specifying an ISO 4217 currency code.
}
```

!> To change the default currency, see [Setting the Default Currency](/features#setting-the-default-currency).

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  numerical?: true | string | NumericalObject<RowType>;
  ....
}
```

?> For more information on numerical rendering and formatting, see [Currency & Number Formatting](/features#currency-amp-number-formatting).

#### Data Type - Optional

The `dataType` field is used the specify the type of the data. This field can be used as the default for [`filterColumn.type`](#filtering-optional) and [`editable.type`](#editing-optional).

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  dataType?: "string" | "number" | "boolean" | "date";
  ....
}
```

#### Footer - Optional

The `footer` field is used to render a column footer and is passed all the table's data and returns a `ReactNode`.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  footer?(tableData: AllDataType): ReactNode;
  ....
}
```

#### Grouping - Optional

The `groupBy` field is a dot-notation path that indicates that this cell should span the rows which have the same value as this, using strict equality `===`, until a row with a different value is found.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  groupBy?: string;
  ....
}
```

#### Alignment - Optional

The `align` field is for specifying how the content of the column's cells should be aligned.

If `align` is unspecified, then the data table attempts to work out the alignment itself. It does this by checking for a few conditions:

- if the `numerical` field is used, then align `"right"`
- if `typeof rendered value === "number"` then align `"right"`
- else align `"left"`

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  align?: "left" | "center" | "right";
  ....
}
```

#### Limit Width - Optional

The `limitWidth` field is used to limit the width of the column.

There are currently two possible values being:

- `lg` which limits the width to `20em`
- `sm` which limits the width to `6em`

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  limitWidth?: "lg" | "sm";
  ....
}
```

#### Row Span - Optional

The `rowSpan` field is a function which allows for specifying a custom row span.

The function is passed three arguments:

- the current row's data
- the index of the row in the array of all table data
- all the table's data

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  rowSpan?(data: RowType, index: number, arr: RowType[]): number;
  ....
}
```

#### Sorting - Optional

The `sorter` field is a helper field used to specify the sorting behaviour of the column.

The value can be one of:

- `true` which uses the `dataIndex` field to specify the path to the data to sort by
- A path to the data to sort by
- A sorter function

?> If the value is a sorter function, it is passed two arguments which are two adjacent data. Similar to a compare function for `Array.prototype.sort()`.

!> The sorter function value is only available when the sorting is done client-side.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  sorter?: true | string | (a: RowType, b: RowType) => number;
  ....
}
```

#### Filtering - Optional

The `filterColumn` field is a helper field used to specify the filtering behaviour of the column.

The value can be one of:

- `true` which defaults to the path specified in the `dataIndex` field
- a string specifying the path to the data to be filtered
- an object with the type:

```ts
interface FilterOptions<RowType extends BaseData> {
  path: true | string; // `true` uses the value of `dataIndex`
  type?: "string" | "number" | "boolean" | "date" | undefined | null; // defaults to the value of the `dataType` field or `"string"` if `dataType` is not specified
  defaultOperator?: "exists" | "!exists" | "~" | "!~" | "=" | "!=" | ">" | ">=" | "<" | "<="; // See below for the meanings of these values
}
```

?> If the value is `true` or a string, then the filter type defaults to `"string"`

?> `defaultOperator` is optional and can be used if there is a common use-case for a field.
For example, `registrationDate` may commonly be queried with the `>` operator e.g. to find the most recently registered users.
See [Filter Operators](#filter-operators) for further details on the operators.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  filterColumn?: true | string | FilterOptions<RowType>;
  ....
}
```

##### Filter Operators

Below are all the different operators for the filter, along with their `typeLabelMap` which defines which operators are available for which type(s) and the labels for each type.

> When there is a `default` field in the `typeLabelMap`, that means the operator is enabled for all data types with the value being the default label.

```ts
[
  {
    value: "exists",
    typeLabelMap: {
      default: "exists",
    },
  },
  {
    value: "!exists",
    typeLabelMap: {
      default: "does not exist",
    },
  },
  {
    value: "~",
    typeLabelMap: {
      string: "contains",
    },
  },
  {
    value: "!~",
    typeLabelMap: {
      string: "does not contain",
    },
  },
  {
    value: "=",
    typeLabelMap: {
      default: "is",
      number: "=",
    },
  },
  {
    value: "!=",
    typeLabelMap: {
      default: "is not",
      number: "≠",
    },
  },
  {
    value: ">",
    typeLabelMap: {
      date: "is after",
      number: ">",
    },
  },
  {
    value: ">=",
    typeLabelMap: {
      date: "is on or after",
      number: "≥",
    },
  },
  {
    value: "<",
    typeLabelMap: {
      date: "is before",
      number: "<",
    },
  },
  {
    value: "<=",
    typeLabelMap: {
      date: "is on or before",
      number: "≤",
    },
  },
];
```

#### Editing - Optional

The `editable` field is used to specify the edit options for the cell.

The value can be one of:

- `true` which defaults to the path specified in the `dataIndex` field
- a string specifying the path to the data to be filtered
- an object with the type:

```ts
interface EditComponentProps {
  defaultValue: unknown;
  onChange: Dispatch<unknown>;
  error: boolean;
  helperText: string | null;
  /**
   * Boolean flag for when the input should be disabled.
   *
   * The value is `true` when the it is validating the edit value and then updating the data.
   */
  disabled: boolean;
}

export interface EditableOptions<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  path: true | string; // `true` uses the value of the `dataIndex` field
  /**
   * The data type. Used to determine the type of the input.
   *
   * If not specified, the type is inferred from the `dataType` field.
   */
  type?: "string" | "number" | "boolean" | "date" | "select";
  /**
   * Custom edit component.
   */
  component?: (props: EditComponentProps, data: RowType, allData: AllDataType) => ReactNode;
  /**
   * Validation for the input value.
   *
   * @param value the input value.
   * @returns the value, post-validation.
   * @throws an error if the value is invalid.
   * If you want to display an error message as helper text, throw an error with a message.
   */
  validate?<T>(value: T, options: { data: RowType; allData: AllDataType }): any | Promise<any>;
  /**
   * Options or a function that returns the options for the select component when `type` is `"select"`.
   */
  selectOptions?: SelectFieldOption[] | ((data: RowType, allData: AllDataType) => SelectFieldOption[]);
  /**
   * Default value if the value at the `path` is `undefined` or `null`.
   */
  defaultValue?: EditType;
}
```

?> An unspecified type defaults to the value of the `dataType` field. This includes if `editable` is `true` or a `string`.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  editable?: true | string | EditableOptions<RowType, AllDataType>;
  ....
}
```

#### Pinnable - Optional

The `pinnable` field is used to specify whether the column is able to be "pinned" and appear on top of other columns as you scroll. This displays a header action button which freezes the column.

!> This uses the CSS `sticky` property which may not be fully supported in all browsers. See `caniuse` [here](https://caniuse.com/css-sticky) to check if it is supported for your target browser(s).

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  pinnable?: boolean;
  ....
}
```

#### Header Action Buttons - Optional

The `actionButtons` field is used to add additional custom action buttons to the column header cell.

The value is an array of objects with the type:

```ts
import { IconButtonProps } from "@material-ui/core";

interface ActionButton extends Omit<IconButtonProps, "size"> {
  key: string;
  icon: ReactNode;
  onClick(): void;
}
```

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  actionButtons?: ActionButton[];
  ....
}
```

#### Column Groups - Optional

The `colGroup` field is used to define the nested columns to this column. This is demonstrated in the [demo](/demo) with the `Cash Balance` columns.

The value of `colGroup` is an array of `ColGroupDefinition` objects. Which has the type:

```ts
type ColGroupDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> = Omit<
  ColumnDefinition<RowType, AllDataType>,
  "colGroup"
>;
```

?> In other words, `ColGroupDefinition` has the same type as `ColumnDefinition` but without the `colGroup` field. So, columns can only be nested to a depth of `1`.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  colGroup: ColGroupDefinition<RowType, AllDataType>[];
  ....
}
```

Commit message:

[feature] hidden columns
- dev changes
- [docs] changes
- General improvements
- Changed `filteredTableStructure` to just be `structure` which also has properties for `notHidden`, `flattened` and `flattened.notHidden`
- Removed uses of `flattenedTableStructure` for `structure.flattened`
- Changes for updated `structure` field and only rendering unhidden columns
- [types] changes for `hidden` field
- Added `getUnhiddenColumns` utility function to handle filtering  out hidden columns

docs/columns.md, after:

# Column Definitions

The table's structure is defined by an array of columns which have the type `ColumnDefinition`.

This section shall go into more detail about what makes up the `ColumnDefinition` and the features you have access to.

## The Options

The Column Definition has many fields you can make use of.

#### Key - Required

The `key` field is the unique identifier for the column.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  key: string;
  ....
}
```

#### Title - Required

The **required** `title` field is used to specify the column header title and has two possible values:

- a `ReactNode` with some types excluded (see below)
- or a function which returns a `ReactNode` with some types excluded (see below)

?> If the value is a function, then it is passed all the table's data as an argument.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  title: Exclude<ReactNode, number | boolean | null | undefined> | (data: AllDataType) => Exclude<ReactNode, number | boolean | null | undefined>;
  ....
}
```

#### Path Render - Optional

The `dataIndex` field is used to specify the path to the data which is to be rendered using dot-notation.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  dataIndex?: string;
  ....
}
```

#### Custom Render - Optional

The `render` field is used for custom rendering of the content.

Its type is a function which is given:

- the current row's data
- whether the function is being called as part of exporting to CSV
- the unique row identifier
- the index of the row in the array of data

and returns a `ReactNode`.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  render?(data: RowType, isCSVExport: boolean, rowId: string, dataArrayIndex: number): ReactNode;
  ....
}
```

#### Numerical Render - Optional

The `numerical` field is a helper field for rendering and formatting numerical values.

The value can be one of:

- `true` which uses default number formatter options to render the value at the given `dataIndex`
- a path to the value to be rendered which also uses default formatting options
- an object with the type:

```ts
interface NumericalObject<RowType extends BaseData = BaseData> {
  path?: true | string; // `true` uses the value of `dataIndex`
  decimalPlaces?: number;
  minDecimalPlaces?: number;
  maxDecimalPlaces?: number;
  currency?: true | string; // `true` uses the default currency, which is "GBP" by default. Or you can override it here by specifying an ISO 4217 currency code.
}
```

!> To change the default currency, see [Setting the Default Currency](/features#setting-the-default-currency).

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  numerical?: true | string | NumericalObject<RowType>;
  ....
}
```

?> For more information on numerical rendering and formatting, see [Currency & Number Formatting](/features#currency-amp-number-formatting).

#### Hidden Columns - Optional

The `hidden` field is used to specify a column that will not be rendered, but will be available for functionality such as filtering and the CSV Export.

This can be useful for fields that may not provide much visual benefit, but very useful for filtering the data. E.g. Id values may not want to be rendered in the table but may want to search up an entry by the Id.

```ts

interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  hidden?: boolean;
  ....
}
```

#### Data Type - Optional

The `dataType` field is used the specify the type of the data. This field can be used as the default for [`filterColumn.type`](#filtering-optional) and [`editable.type`](#editing-optional).

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  dataType?: "string" | "number" | "boolean" | "date";
  ....
}
```

#### Footer - Optional

The `footer` field is used to render a column footer and is passed all the table's data and returns a `ReactNode`.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  footer?(tableData: AllDataType): ReactNode;
  ....
}
```

#### Grouping - Optional

The `groupBy` field is a dot-notation path that indicates that this cell should span the rows which have the same value as this, using strict equality `===`, until a row with a different value is found.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  groupBy?: string;
  ....
}
```

#### Alignment - Optional

The `align` field is for specifying how the content of the column's cells should be aligned.

If `align` is unspecified, then the data table attempts to work out the alignment itself. It does this by checking for a few conditions:

- if the `numerical` field is used, then align `"right"`
- if `typeof rendered value === "number"` then align `"right"`
- else align `"left"`

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  align?: "left" | "center" | "right";
  ....
}
```

#### Limit Width - Optional

The `limitWidth` field is used to limit the width of the column.

There are currently two possible values being:

- `lg` which limits the width to `20em`
- `sm` which limits the width to `6em`

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  limitWidth?: "lg" | "sm";
  ....
}
```

#### Row Span - Optional

The `rowSpan` field is a function which allows for specifying a custom row span.

The function is passed three arguments:

- the current row's data
- the index of the row in the array of all table data
- all the table's data

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  rowSpan?(data: RowType, index: number, arr: RowType[]): number;
  ....
}
```

#### Sorting - Optional

The `sorter` field is a helper field used to specify the sorting behaviour of the column.

The value can be one of:

- `true` which uses the `dataIndex` field to specify the path to the data to sort by
- A path to the data to sort by
- A sorter function

?> If the value is a sorter function, it is passed two arguments which are two adjacent data. Similar to a compare function for `Array.prototype.sort()`.

!> The sorter function value is only available when the sorting is done client-side.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  sorter?: true | string | (a: RowType, b: RowType) => number;
  ....
}
```

#### Filtering - Optional

The `filterColumn` field is a helper field used to specify the filtering behaviour of the column.

The value can be one of:

- `true` which defaults to the path specified in the `dataIndex` field
- a string specifying the path to the data to be filtered
- an object with the type:

```ts
interface FilterOptions<RowType extends BaseData> {
  path: true | string; // `true` uses the value of `dataIndex`
  type?: "string" | "number" | "boolean" | "date" | undefined | null; // defaults to the value of the `dataType` field or `"string"` if `dataType` is not specified
  defaultOperator?: "exists" | "!exists" | "~" | "!~" | "=" | "!=" | ">" | ">=" | "<" | "<="; // See below for the meanings of these values
}
```

?> If the value is `true` or a string, then the filter type defaults to `"string"`

?> `defaultOperator` is optional and can be used if there is a common use-case for a field.
For example, `registrationDate` may commonly be queried with the `>` operator e.g. to find the most recently registered users.
See [Filter Operators](#filter-operators) for further details on the operators.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  filterColumn?: true | string | FilterOptions<RowType>;
  ....
}
```

##### Filter Operators

Below are all the different operators for the filter, along with their `typeLabelMap` which defines which operators are available for which type(s) and the labels for each type.

> When there is a `default` field in the `typeLabelMap`, that means the operator is enabled for all data types with the value being the default label.

```ts
[
  {
    value: "exists",
    typeLabelMap: {
      default: "exists",
    },
  },
  {
    value: "!exists",
    typeLabelMap: {
      default: "does not exist",
    },
  },
  {
    value: "~",
    typeLabelMap: {
      string: "contains",
    },
  },
  {
    value: "!~",
    typeLabelMap: {
      string: "does not contain",
    },
  },
  {
    value: "=",
    typeLabelMap: {
      default: "is",
      number: "=",
    },
  },
  {
    value: "!=",
    typeLabelMap: {
      default: "is not",
      number: "≠",
    },
  },
  {
    value: ">",
    typeLabelMap: {
      date: "is after",
      number: ">",
    },
  },
  {
    value: ">=",
    typeLabelMap: {
      date: "is on or after",
      number: "≥",
    },
  },
  {
    value: "<",
    typeLabelMap: {
      date: "is before",
      number: "<",
    },
  },
  {
    value: "<=",
    typeLabelMap: {
      date: "is on or before",
      number: "≤",
    },
  },
];
```

#### Editing - Optional

The `editable` field is used to specify the edit options for the cell.

The value can be one of:

- `true` which defaults to the path specified in the `dataIndex` field
- a string specifying the path to the data to be filtered
- an object with the type:

```ts
interface EditComponentProps {
  defaultValue: unknown;
  onChange: Dispatch<unknown>;
  error: boolean;
  helperText: string | null;
  /**
   * Boolean flag for when the input should be disabled.
   *
   * The value is `true` when the it is validating the edit value and then updating the data.
   */
  disabled: boolean;
}

export interface EditableOptions<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  path: true | string; // `true` uses the value of the `dataIndex` field
  /**
   * The data type. Used to determine the type of the input.
   *
   * If not specified, the type is inferred from the `dataType` field.
   */
  type?: "string" | "number" | "boolean" | "date" | "select";
  /**
   * Custom edit component.
   */
  component?: (props: EditComponentProps, data: RowType, allData: AllDataType) => ReactNode;
  /**
   * Validation for the input value.
   *
   * @param value the input value.
   * @returns the value, post-validation.
   * @throws an error if the value is invalid.
   * If you want to display an error message as helper text, throw an error with a message.
   */
  validate?<T>(value: T, options: { data: RowType; allData: AllDataType }): any | Promise<any>;
  /**
   * Options or a function that returns the options for the select component when `type` is `"select"`.
   */
  selectOptions?: SelectFieldOption[] | ((data: RowType, allData: AllDataType) => SelectFieldOption[]);
  /**
   * Default value if the value at the `path` is `undefined` or `null`.
   */
  defaultValue?: EditType;
}
```

?> An unspecified type defaults to the value of the `dataType` field. This includes if `editable` is `true` or a `string`.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  editable?: true | string | EditableOptions<RowType, AllDataType>;
  ....
}
```

#### Pinnable - Optional

The `pinnable` field is used to specify whether the column is able to be "pinned" and appear on top of other columns as you scroll. This displays a header action button which freezes the column.

!> This uses the CSS `sticky` property which may not be fully supported in all browsers. See `caniuse` [here](https://caniuse.com/css-sticky) to check if it is supported for your target browser(s).

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  pinnable?: boolean;
  ....
}
```

#### Header Action Buttons - Optional

The `actionButtons` field is used to add additional custom action buttons to the column header cell.

The value is an array of objects with the type:

```ts
import { IconButtonProps } from "@material-ui/core";

interface ActionButton extends Omit<IconButtonProps, "size"> {
  key: string;
  icon: ReactNode;
  onClick(): void;
}
```

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  actionButtons?: ActionButton[];
  ....
}
```

#### Column Groups - Optional

The `colGroup` field is used to define the nested columns to this column. This is demonstrated in the [demo](/demo) with the `Cash Balance` columns.

The value of `colGroup` is an array of `ColGroupDefinition` objects. Which has the type:

```ts
type ColGroupDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> = Omit<
  ColumnDefinition<RowType, AllDataType>,
  "colGroup"
>;
```

?> In other words, `ColGroupDefinition` has the same type as `ColumnDefinition` but without the `colGroup` field. So, columns can only be nested to a depth of `1`.

```ts
interface ColumnDefinition<RowType extends BaseData, AllDataType extends RowType[]> {
  ....
  colGroup: ColGroupDefinition<RowType, AllDataType>[];
  ....
}
```
